gitpod/docs/self-hosted/latest/reference-architecture/_chunks/storage.md, before:

---
layout: false
---

<script lang="ts">
  import CloudPlatformToggle from "$lib/components/docs/cloud-platform-toggle.svelte";
</script>

Gitpod uses **object storage** to store blob data. This includes workspace backups that are created when a workspace stops and are used to restore state upon restart. Different user settings like IDE preferences are also stored this way.

This reference architecture uses managed object storage commonly offered by all cloud providers.

<CloudPlatformToggle id="cloud-platform-toggle-object-storage">
<div slot="gcp">

For each Gitpod user, their own bucket will be created at runtime. For this reason, Gitpod needs proper rights to create buckets in the object storage. Create a service account that has the following roles:

| Roles                     |
| ------------------------- |
| roles/storage.admin       |
| roles/storage.objectAdmin |

```bash
OBJECT_STORAGE_SA=gitpod-storage
OBJECT_STORAGE_SA_EMAIL="${OBJECT_STORAGE_SA}"@"${PROJECT_NAME}".iam.gserviceaccount.com
gcloud iam service-accounts create "${OBJECT_STORAGE_SA}" --display-name "${OBJECT_STORAGE_SA}"
gcloud projects add-iam-policy-binding "${PROJECT_NAME}" \
    --member serviceAccount:"${OBJECT_STORAGE_SA_EMAIL}" --role="roles/storage.admin"
gcloud projects add-iam-policy-binding "${PROJECT_NAME}" \
    --member serviceAccount:"${OBJECT_STORAGE_SA_EMAIL}" --role="roles/storage.objectAdmin"
```

Save the service account key to the file `./gs-credentials.json`:

```bash
gcloud iam service-accounts keys create --iam-account "${OBJECT_STORAGE_SA_EMAIL}" \
    ./gs-credentials.json
```

</div>
<div slot="aws">

Below, we create one S3 bucket and one IAM User service account to access it. These credentials and the bucket are used for both object storage and storing the workspace images via a Registry frontend deployed in Gitpod (and when Gitpod is installed). The bucket has to have a globally unique name.

```bash
export S3_BUCKET_NAME="suitably-tired-puma-registry"
echo ${S3_BUCKET_NAME}
```

### Create the S3 Bucket and ensure it is private

Create an S3 bucket using the following command:

```bash
aws s3api create-bucket \
    --bucket ${S3_BUCKET_NAME} \
    --region eu-west-1 --create-bucket-configuration LocationConstraint=eu-west-1 \
    --object-ownership BucketOwnerEnforced
aws s3api put-public-access-block \
    --bucket ${S3_BUCKET_NAME} \
    --public-access-block-configuration "BlockPublicAcls=true,IgnorePublicAcls=true,BlockPublicPolicy=true,RestrictPublicBuckets=true"
```

### Create an IAM user for credentials with access just to this bucket

```bash
aws iam create-user \
  --user-name gitpod-s3-access \
  --tags Key=project,Value=gitpod
```

Save the following file as `S3_policy.json`, replacing `${S3_BUCKET_NAME}` with the S3 bucket you created:

```json
{
  "Statement": [
    {
      "Action": [
        "s3:ListBucketMultipartUploads",
        "s3:ListBucket",
        "s3:GetBucketLocation"
      ],
      "Effect": "Allow",
      "Resource": ["arn:aws:s3:::${S3_BUCKET_NAME}>"],
      "Sid": ""
    },
    {
      "Action": [
        "s3:PutObject",
        "s3:ListMultipartUploadParts",
        "s3:GetObject",
        "s3:DeleteObject",
        "s3:AbortMultipartUpload"
      ],
      "Effect": "Allow",
      "Resource": ["arn:aws:s3:::${S3_BUCKET_NAME}/*"],
      "Sid": ""
    }
  ],
  "Version": "2012-10-17"
}
```

Create the policy, taking note of the ARN in the output:

```bash
aws iam create-policy \
    --policy-name gitpod_s3_access_policy \
    --policy-document <file://S3_policy.json> \
    --tags Key=project,Value=gitpod
```

This should result in the following output:

```bash
{
    "Policy": {
        "PolicyName": "gitpod_s3_access_policy",
        "PolicyId": "ANPA2B3JAS5KQGN6MQRMW",
        "Arn": "arn:aws:iam::691173103445:policy/gitpod_s3_access_policy",
        "Path": "/",
        "DefaultVersionId": "v1",
        "AttachmentCount": 0,
        "PermissionsBoundaryUsageCount": 0,
        "IsAttachable": true,
        "CreateDate": "2022-06-24T14:31:30+00:00",
        "UpdateDate": "2022-06-24T14:31:30+00:00",
        "Tags": [
            {
                "Key": "project",
                "Value": "gitpod"
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

Attach the policy to the IAM user you just created:

```bash
aws iam attach-user-policy \
    --user-name gitpod-s3-access \
    --policy-arn '<arn from above, similar to: arn:aws:iam::691173103445:policy/gitpod_s3_access_policy>'
```

### Create and store a user access token

Create an access key with the following command, and securely record the resulting `AccessKeyId` and `SecretAccessKey` fields:

```bash
aws iam create-access-key --user-name gitpod-s3-access
```

This should result in an output similar to the following:

```bash
{
    "AccessKey": {
        "UserName": "gitpod-s3-access",
        "AccessKeyId": "<accessKeyId>",
        "Status": "Active",
        "SecretAccessKey": "<SecretAccessKey>",
        "CreateDate": "2022-06-24T14:37:40+00:00"
    }
}
```

To test that these credentials provide write access to the S3 bucket, open a new shell session and configure it to use the `AccessKeyId` and `SecretAccessKey` you've just retrieved, and attempt to upload a file and then delete it:

```sh
export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=<accessKeyId>
export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=<SecretAccessKey>
aws s3 ls s3://${S3_BUCKET_NAME}
echo "hello world" > gitpod_test.txt
aws s3 cp gitpod_test.txt s3://${S3_BUCKET_NAME}
# => upload: ./gitpod_test.txt to s3://$S3_BUCKET_NAME/gitpod_test.txt
aws s3 ls s3://${S3_BUCKET_NAME}
# => 2022-06-24 15:50:20         12 gitpod_test.txt
aws s3 rm s3://${S3_BUCKET_NAME}/gitpod_test.txt
# => delete: s3://$S3_BUCKET_NAME/gitpod_test.txt
aws s3 ls s3://${S3_BUCKET_NAME}
# => *nothing returns if empty*
```

To avoid impacting any further calls to AWS, unset the environment variables created:

```bash
unset AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID
unset AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY
```

</div>

<div slot="azure">

The Azure storage account name must be globally unique; note the value of `$STORAGE_ACCOUNT_NAME` for later.

```bash
export STORAGE_ACCOUNT_NAME="gitpod$(openssl rand -hex 4)"
echo "$STORAGE_ACCOUNT_NAME"
```

```bash
az storage account create \
  --access-tier Hot \
  --kind StorageV2 \
  --location "${LOCATION}" \
  --name "${STORAGE_ACCOUNT_NAME}" \
  --resource-group "${RESOURCE_GROUP}" \
  --sku Standard_LRS
```

After creating the storage account, grant access to Gitpod cluster to that storage account.

```bash
PRINCIPAL_ID=$(az aks show --name "${CLUSTER_NAME}" --resource-group "${RESOURCE_GROUP}" --query "identityProfile.kubeletidentity.objectId" -o tsv)

STORAGE_ACCOUNT_ID=$(az storage account show \
  --name "${STORAGE_ACCOUNT_NAME}" \
  --output tsv \
  --query id \
  --resource-group "${RESOURCE_GROUP}" )

az role assignment create \
    --assignee "${PRINCIPAL_ID}" \
    --role "Storage Blob Data Contributor" \
    --scope "${STORAGE_ACCOUNT_ID}"
```

```bash
STORAGE_ACCOUNT_KEY=$(az storage account keys list \
    --account-name "${STORAGE_ACCOUNT_NAME}" \
    --resource-group "${RESOURCE_GROUP}" \
    --output json
)
```

</div>

</CloudPlatformToggle>

Commit message:

[ref-arch/single/azure] Update storage section steps

gitpod/docs/self-hosted/latest/reference-architecture/_chunks/storage.md, after:

---
layout: false
---

<script lang="ts">
  import CloudPlatformToggle from "$lib/components/docs/cloud-platform-toggle.svelte";
</script>

Gitpod uses **object storage** to store blob data. This includes workspace backups that are created when a workspace stops and are used to restore state upon restart. Different user settings like IDE preferences are also stored this way.

This reference architecture uses managed object storage commonly offered by all cloud providers.

<CloudPlatformToggle id="cloud-platform-toggle-object-storage">
<div slot="gcp">

For each Gitpod user, their own bucket will be created at runtime. For this reason, Gitpod needs proper rights to create buckets in the object storage. Create a service account that has the following roles:

| Roles                     |
| ------------------------- |
| roles/storage.admin       |
| roles/storage.objectAdmin |

```bash
OBJECT_STORAGE_SA=gitpod-storage
OBJECT_STORAGE_SA_EMAIL="${OBJECT_STORAGE_SA}"@"${PROJECT_NAME}".iam.gserviceaccount.com
gcloud iam service-accounts create "${OBJECT_STORAGE_SA}" --display-name "${OBJECT_STORAGE_SA}"
gcloud projects add-iam-policy-binding "${PROJECT_NAME}" \
    --member serviceAccount:"${OBJECT_STORAGE_SA_EMAIL}" --role="roles/storage.admin"
gcloud projects add-iam-policy-binding "${PROJECT_NAME}" \
    --member serviceAccount:"${OBJECT_STORAGE_SA_EMAIL}" --role="roles/storage.objectAdmin"
```

Save the service account key to the file `./gs-credentials.json`:

```bash
gcloud iam service-accounts keys create --iam-account "${OBJECT_STORAGE_SA_EMAIL}" \
    ./gs-credentials.json
```

</div>
<div slot="aws">

Below, we create one S3 bucket and one IAM User service account to access it. These credentials and the bucket are used for both object storage and storing the workspace images via a Registry frontend deployed in Gitpod (and when Gitpod is installed). The bucket has to have a globally unique name.

```bash
export S3_BUCKET_NAME="suitably-tired-puma-registry"
echo ${S3_BUCKET_NAME}
```

### Create the S3 Bucket and ensure it is private

Create an S3 bucket using the following command:

```bash
aws s3api create-bucket \
    --bucket ${S3_BUCKET_NAME} \
    --region eu-west-1 --create-bucket-configuration LocationConstraint=eu-west-1 \
    --object-ownership BucketOwnerEnforced
aws s3api put-public-access-block \
    --bucket ${S3_BUCKET_NAME} \
    --public-access-block-configuration "BlockPublicAcls=true,IgnorePublicAcls=true,BlockPublicPolicy=true,RestrictPublicBuckets=true"
```

### Create an IAM user for credentials with access just to this bucket

```bash
aws iam create-user \
  --user-name gitpod-s3-access \
  --tags Key=project,Value=gitpod
```

Save the following file as `S3_policy.json`, replacing `${S3_BUCKET_NAME}` with the S3 bucket you created:

```json
{
  "Statement": [
    {
      "Action": [
        "s3:ListBucketMultipartUploads",
        "s3:ListBucket",
        "s3:GetBucketLocation"
      ],
      "Effect": "Allow",
      "Resource": ["arn:aws:s3:::${S3_BUCKET_NAME}>"],
      "Sid": ""
    },
    {
      "Action": [
        "s3:PutObject",
        "s3:ListMultipartUploadParts",
        "s3:GetObject",
        "s3:DeleteObject",
        "s3:AbortMultipartUpload"
      ],
      "Effect": "Allow",
      "Resource": ["arn:aws:s3:::${S3_BUCKET_NAME}/*"],
      "Sid": ""
    }
  ],
  "Version": "2012-10-17"
}
```

Create the policy, taking note of the ARN in the output:

```bash
aws iam create-policy \
    --policy-name gitpod_s3_access_policy \
    --policy-document <file://S3_policy.json> \
    --tags Key=project,Value=gitpod
```

This should result in the following output:

```bash
{
    "Policy": {
        "PolicyName": "gitpod_s3_access_policy",
        "PolicyId": "ANPA2B3JAS5KQGN6MQRMW",
        "Arn": "arn:aws:iam::691173103445:policy/gitpod_s3_access_policy",
        "Path": "/",
        "DefaultVersionId": "v1",
        "AttachmentCount": 0,
        "PermissionsBoundaryUsageCount": 0,
        "IsAttachable": true,
        "CreateDate": "2022-06-24T14:31:30+00:00",
        "UpdateDate": "2022-06-24T14:31:30+00:00",
        "Tags": [
            {
                "Key": "project",
                "Value": "gitpod"
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

Attach the policy to the IAM user you just created:

```bash
aws iam attach-user-policy \
    --user-name gitpod-s3-access \
    --policy-arn '<arn from above, similar to: arn:aws:iam::691173103445:policy/gitpod_s3_access_policy>'
```

### Create and store a user access token

Create an access key with the following command, and securely record the resulting `AccessKeyId` and `SecretAccessKey` fields:

```bash
aws iam create-access-key --user-name gitpod-s3-access
```

This should result in an output similar to the following:

```bash
{
    "AccessKey": {
        "UserName": "gitpod-s3-access",
        "AccessKeyId": "<accessKeyId>",
        "Status": "Active",
        "SecretAccessKey": "<SecretAccessKey>",
        "CreateDate": "2022-06-24T14:37:40+00:00"
    }
}
```

To test that these credentials provide write access to the S3 bucket, open a new shell session and configure it to use the `AccessKeyId` and `SecretAccessKey` you've just retrieved, and attempt to upload a file and then delete it:

```sh
export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=<accessKeyId>
export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=<SecretAccessKey>
aws s3 ls s3://${S3_BUCKET_NAME}
echo "hello world" > gitpod_test.txt
aws s3 cp gitpod_test.txt s3://${S3_BUCKET_NAME}
# => upload: ./gitpod_test.txt to s3://$S3_BUCKET_NAME/gitpod_test.txt
aws s3 ls s3://${S3_BUCKET_NAME}
# => 2022-06-24 15:50:20         12 gitpod_test.txt
aws s3 rm s3://${S3_BUCKET_NAME}/gitpod_test.txt
# => delete: s3://$S3_BUCKET_NAME/gitpod_test.txt
aws s3 ls s3://${S3_BUCKET_NAME}
# => *nothing returns if empty*
```

To avoid impacting any further calls to AWS, unset the environment variables created:

```bash
unset AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID
unset AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY
```

</div>

<div slot="azure">

This section will create an Azure storage account for Gitpod object storage and backups.

Generate a name for the Azure storage account. The Azure storage account name must be globally unique; using a random suffix is recommended but any unique value can be used.

```bash
export STORAGE_ACCOUNT_NAME="gitpod$(openssl rand -hex 4)"
echo "$STORAGE_ACCOUNT_NAME"
```

Note the value of `$STORAGE_ACCOUNT_NAME` for later use.

Create the storage account:

```bash
az storage account create \
  --access-tier Hot \
  --kind StorageV2 \
  --location "${LOCATION}" \
  --name "${STORAGE_ACCOUNT_NAME}" \
  --resource-group "${RESOURCE_GROUP}" \
  --sku Standard_LRS
```

After creating the storage account, grant access to Gitpod cluster to that storage account.

```bash
KUBELET_PRINCIPAL_ID=$(az aks show --name "${CLUSTER_NAME}" --resource-group "${RESOURCE_GROUP}" --query "identityProfile.kubeletidentity.objectId" -o tsv)

STORAGE_ACCOUNT_ID=$(az storage account show \
  --name "${STORAGE_ACCOUNT_NAME}" \
  --output tsv \
  --query id \
  --resource-group "${RESOURCE_GROUP}")

az role assignment create \
    --assignee "${KUBELET_PRINCIPAL_ID}" \
    --role "Storage Blob Data Contributor" \
    --scope "${STORAGE_ACCOUNT_ID}"
```

Note the storage account key for later use.

```bash
STORAGE_ACCOUNT_KEY=$(az storage account keys list \
    --account-name "${STORAGE_ACCOUNT_NAME}" \
    --resource-group "${RESOURCE_GROUP}" \
    --query '[?keyName==`key1`].value' \
    --output tsv
)
```

</div>

</CloudPlatformToggle>
