gitpod/docs/self-hosted/latest/upgrade-guides.md, before:

---
section: self-hosted/latest
subsection: reference
title: Upgrade Guides and Breaking Changes
---

<script context="module">
  export const prerender = true;
</script>

# Upgrade Guides and Breaking Changes

This page informs you if there are specific considerations to take into account when upgrading to a specific version. If no breaking changes and thus specific recommendations when updating are mentioned here, please follow the normal upgrade procedure mentioned on the [Updating your Gitpod Installation](../latest/updating) page.

## 2022.07

### Setting the service type of the proxy component

You can now configure the service type of the proxy service in the installation UI (see image below) - you do not need to upload a `.yaml` file as a [config patch](./config-patches) anymore to configure this. However, having it in the config patch will still work until December.

![proxy service type UI](../../static/images/docs/self-hosted/proxy-service-type-ui.png)

### Setting the default workspace image and which image registries the default image can be pulled from

We've moved the configuration of the default workspace image and the default base image registry whitelist out of the experimental section of the [config-patch](../latest/config-patches) file. The latter was also renamed. Using them in the experimental section will still work for the time being (until approx. December 2022).

**Before:**

```yaml
experimental:
  webApp:
    server:
      defaultBaseImageRegistryWhitelist:
        - <allowed registries>
    workspaceDefaults:
      workspaceImage: <path to your default workspace image>
```

**After:**

```yaml
workspace:
  workspaceImage: <path to your default workspace image>
containerRegistry:
  privateBaseImageAllowList:
    - <allowed registries>
```

Commit message:

add changelog entry with basic content

gitpod/docs/self-hosted/latest/upgrade-guides.md, after:

---
section: self-hosted/latest
subsection: reference
title: Upgrade Guides and Breaking Changes
---

<script context="module">
  export const prerender = true;
</script>

# Upgrade Guides and Breaking Changes

This page informs you if there are specific considerations to take into account when upgrading to a specific version. If no breaking changes and thus specific recommendations when updating are mentioned here, please follow the normal upgrade procedure mentioned on the [Updating your Gitpod Installation](../latest/updating) page.

## 2022.08

**Custom labels from the pod selector labels removed**

[11954](https://github.com/gitpod-io/gitpod/pull/11954): remove custom labels from the pod selector labels. This removes this [limitation](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/self-hosted/latest/advanced/customization#limitations) so this is a long-term improvement. The impact of this should be handled transparently for you by the KOTS installer.

**Usage of PodSecurityPolicies removed**

[12336](https://github.com/gitpod-io/gitpod/pull/12336): Removal of PodSecurityPolicies. These were deprecated from Kubernetes 1.21 and removed from 1.25. This allows Gitpod to run on Kubernetes 1.25+, which is scheduled for imminent release. If you have PodSecurityPolicies enabled in your cluster, we suggest you enable them if possible. if an installation is deployed to a cluster with PSPs enabled, they will need to add `experimental.common.usePodSecurityPolicies = true` to a [config-patch file](./config-patches) - however, do note that this is not maintained and will be deprecated soon.

## 2022.07

**Setting the service type of the proxy component**

You can now configure the service type of the proxy service in the installation UI (see image below) - you do not need to upload a `.yaml` file as a [config patch](./config-patches) anymore to configure this. However, having it in the config patch will still work until December.

![proxy service type UI](../../static/images/docs/self-hosted/proxy-service-type-ui.png)

**Setting the default workspace image and which image registries the default image can be pulled from**

We've moved the configuration of the default workspace image and the default base image registry whitelist out of the experimental section of the [config-patch](../latest/config-patches) file. The latter was also renamed. Using them in the experimental section will still work for the time being (until approx. December 2022).

**Before:**

```yaml
experimental:
  webApp:
    server:
      defaultBaseImageRegistryWhitelist:
        - <allowed registries>
    workspaceDefaults:
      workspaceImage: <path to your default workspace image>
```

**After:**

```yaml
workspace:
  workspaceImage: <path to your default workspace image>
containerRegistry:
  privateBaseImageAllowList:
    - <allowed registries>
```
